# GA 12.00 Incident Reporting_202306231515040783

rating Pr Manual

City of Poquoson Fire and Rescue

City of Poquoson
Fire and Rescue

830 Poquoson Ave.
Poquoson, VA 23662
757-868-3510
F757-868-3514

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

SOP#: GA 12.00

Title:_ Incident Reporting

Effective Date:

02/02/2009

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

INCIDENT REPORTING

I. PURPOSE

To establish procedures for fire and EMS
incident reporting and for properly
recording Virginia Fire Incident Reporting
System (VIFRS) data and the minimum
data set required in the Prehospital
Patient Care Report (PPCR) procedures as
prescribed by the Virginia Office of EMS
and accordance with section 32.1-116.1 of
the Code of Virginia.

This SOP is not all-inclusive and cannot
encompass all situations that may be
encountered.

II. POLICY

All Incident Reports will be completed
and entered in the computer upon
returning from the incident.

Incident Reports will be completed for

every incident that the Fire Department
responds to.



Standard Operating Procedures Manual
GA 12.00 Incident Reporting

III. RESPONSIBILITIES

The Shift Supervisor shall ensure that Incident Reports are completed
for each Fire and EMS incident and entered into the appropriate
software. The Shift Supervisor is also responsible for checking all
Fire and EMS Incident Reports for accuracy.

The Shift Supervisor is responsible for ensuring reports have been
generated for all incidents.

The Deputy Chief is responsible for ensuring all VFIRS data is
reported and that the data is exported to the VDFP on a monthly
basis.

IV. PROCEDURES

The first-in engine company officer, upon returning from the
incident, shall complete all pertinent sections of the fire report using
the appropriate computer software.

When an engine is responding to a medical call for manpower, a Fire
Incident report is required.

If a medic is responding to a fire incident, an ePCR is not required for
the incident alone. The engine company officer will enter the medic
unit response on the Fire Incident report. If there is a patient, an
ePCR will be required for that patient and entered under the same
incident number as the fire incident.

Fire Incident Reports must be completed prior to end of shift.
EMS Incident Reports will be completed by the Attendant-in-Charge.
EMS Incident Reports must be completed within the Office of EMS

required timeline. a

All spelling must be correct. If in doubt, use spell check, check maps,
directories, or dictionaries.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
