# GA 28.00 Overtime_202406130906401118

City of Poquoson Fire/Rescue

830 Poquoson Avenue, Poquoson, Virginia 23662
(757) 868-3510 Fax (757) 868-3514

Schedule of Changes- SOP’s

SOP: GA 28 Overtime
DATE: May 23, 2024

The following changes were made:

e Added direction for employees that call out to call the on-duty battalion.
e Added direction for the on-duty battalion to contact the on-coming battalion in a
timely manner.

ndar rati res Man
City of Poquoson Fire and Rescue

Overtime

I. PURPOSE

The purpose of this policy is to provide
City of Poquoson guidance for career personnel with regard
Fire and Rescue to voluntary and mandatory overtime.
830 Poquoson Ave. This SOP is not all-inclusive and cannot
Poquoson, VA 23662 ri :
ve encompass all situations that may be
757-868-3510
F757-868-3514 encountered.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION Il. APPLICABILITY

All career staff
SOP#: GA 28.00

, II. POLICY
Title: Ovestine

It is the policy of the City of Poquoson
Effective Date: _ 06/01/2021 Fire/Rescue Department that a minimum
staffing of 8 will be maintained at all
times. If staffing falls below 8, overtime
will be authorized to ensure adequate
emergency coverage. Overtime may also
be authorized at the Fire Chief's discretion
for other department functions such as
training, meetings, etc. with the
concurrence of the City Manager.

OVERTIME 

n rating Pr res Manual
GA 28.00 Overtime

Overtime will be considered either “mandatory” or “voluntary.”
Guidance for these two categories shall be as follows:

e Mandatory Overtime — A need exists for immediate overtime
coverage. Each shift will maintain a mandatory overtime list,
based on seniority, in the Battalion Chief's office. Mandatory
overtime will be assigned to the next employee on the overtime
list who meets the needed qualifications (ie: ALS, Engine
Operator, etc.). Mandatory overtime must not exceed 36
consecutive hours. An exception may be made during a disaster
response or long-term staffing issues. Any exceptions must be
approved by the Fire Chief.

o An employee must work a minimum of two hours of
mandatory overtime to be moved to the bottom of the
mandatory list.

o If“Employee A” is assigned mandatory overtime and
“Employee B” volunteers to cover it for them, “Employee
A’ will remain at the top of the overtime list. This
situation will be considered Voluntary Overtime.

e Voluntary Overtime — A need exists for overtime coverage.
Staff are made aware and an employee volunteers to work the
extra shift. No adjustments will be made to the mandatory
overtime list. Staff may work no more than 72 consecutive
hours under voluntary overtime.

NOTIFICATIONS

When an employee calls out, they must notify the on-duty battalion
by 0630 so that arrangements can be made to cover, if the absence
affects minimum staffing.

If the duty battalion has not been able to find coverage for the
upcoming absence, they must notify the on-coming battalion by
0700. Both on-duty and on-coming battalions should work together
to ensure the absence is covered.

OVERTIME
