# GA 26.00 Football Game Standbys_202212071036091388

ndar rating Pr res Manual

City of Poquoson Fire and Rescue
|

FOOTBALL GAME STANDBYS

I. PURPOSE
City of Poquoson To establish requirements, responsibilities
Fire and Rescue and staffing provided by City of Poquoson

Fire and Rescue in support of Poquoson

cmd Schools athletics.

Poquoson, VA 23662

757-868-3510 . . : :
F757-868-3514 This SOP is not all-inclusive and cannot

encompass all situations that may be

encountered.
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

II. APPLICATION
SOP#: GA 26.00

All career and volunteer personnel.

Title:_Football Game Standbys

Effective Date:___ 10/1/2015

Revised Date: 12/1/2022

uperintendent’s
Signature

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION Page 1 0f 3

r rating Procedures Manual
GA 26.00 Football Game Standbys

III. PROCEDURES
General Guidelines

The City of Poquoson Fire/Rescue will provide a staffed ALS
Medic Unit for each Junior Varsity and Varsity football game. The
game schedule will be provided by the School System to Fire
Administration prior to the beginning of each season. Any changes to
this schedule must be submitted to Fire Administration prior to the
game to allow for arranging a Medic Unit.

The Medic Unit and crew will be located inside the Park Street
gate and available for response. If the Cub Cadet is used, it will be
located with the Medic Unit at the Park Street gate and available for
response.

On arrival at the field, the Attendant in Charge of the Medic
Unit will locate the Poquoson Trainer. This meeting will occur face-
to-face and will determine the method of communication to be used
during the game. Fire Department staff will also ensure the Trainer is
aware of where the medic crew will be located and how to request
assistance from the EMS providers.

Minimum Requirements

The provided Medic Unit will be staffed with a minimum of one
EMT and one Intermediate or Paramedic as per the Virginia
standards for EMS staffing.

If the Cub Cadet is used, it will be staffed with a minimum of
one Released Driver and one Released ALS provider. The EMS crew
assigned to the Medic Unit will not be split to staff the Cub Cadet.
These personnel will remain with the Cub Cadet at all times and be
available to respond if needed. If the Cub Cadet is on the football
field and available for use, it will be stocked with the necessary
equipment for the treatment and transport of a sick or injured
person. Such equipment includes a stretcher, immobilization

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

GA 26.00 Football Game Standbys

equipment, first aid kit, etc. The Cub Cadet will not be used to
transport a person without the proper safety restraint system (such as
stretcher locks and seatbelts).

Treatment and Transport

If any person requires medical treatment and transport from
the game that is not a football player, an additional Medic Unit will
be called for that transport. This will allow the Medic Unit assigned
to the football game to remain on site throughout the game.

If a football player requires medical treatment and transport
from the game, the Medic Unit assigned to the game will transport
and an additional Medic Unit will be sent to the game for standby if
staffing permits.

Payment

Career Fire Department members assigned to the Medic Unit
on standby will be considered At Will employees of the school system
and exempt from FLSA requirements regarding their Fire
Department position. An agreed upon flat rate of $35.00/hour will
be paid to each member of the Medic Unit crew.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
