# GA 20.00 Revenue Recovery_202205120923573966

City of Poquoson Fire and

City of Poquoson
Fire and Rescue

830 Poquoson Ave.
Poquoson, VA 23662
757-868-3510
F757-868-3514

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

SOP#: GA 20.00

Title: Revenue Recovery

Effective Date:___10/01/2009

Revised Date:

12/15/2018

Oh SY NSU
City Manager’s Signature

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

r rating Pr r
Rescue

Revenue Recovery
I. PURPOSE

To outline the policy for distribution of
the Poquoson Fire/Rescue (PFR) Notice
of Privacy Practice Brochure and signing
of the PFR Ambulance Billing
Authorization and Privacy
Acknowledgment Form.

This SOP is not all-inclusive and cannot
encompass all situations that may be
encountered.

II. PROCEDURES

For each patient that is seen by PFR
personnel, the patient or a responsible
party for the patient is to be given a
brochure titled “Notice of Privacy
Practices”.

In addition, for each patient that is
transported or evaluated by PFR
personnel, the patient or a responsible
party is to sign the PFR Ambulance Billing
Authorization and Privacy
Acknowledgment Form which grants
permission for PFR and EMS
Management & Consultants to use
healthcare information for billing
purposes.



n ing P Man
GA 20.00 Revenue Recovery

For all patients that are transported, it is the Attendant In Charge’s
responsibility to obtain the patient FACE sheet from the receiving
medical facility prior to returning to service. For all patients who
refuse transport, the Attendant In Charge should make an effort to
obtain insurance information prior to leaving the scene.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
