# GA 7.00 Uniforms rev2023_202310190745013246

n

r rating Pr res Manual

City of Poquoson Fire and Rescue

City of Poquoson
Fire and Rescue

830 Poquoson Ave.
Poquoson, VA 23662

757-868-3510
F757-868-3514

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

SOP#: GA 7.00

Title:_ Uniforms

Effective Date:__ 01/01/2009

UNIFORMS

I. PURPOSE

To facilitate the display of a neat and
professional appearance by members of
the Fire Department by establishing policy
and guidelines concerning Fire
Department uniforms.

To provide command, company, and
functional identification for Fire
Department personnel and the public.

To establish the uniformity of dress for all
uniformed members of the Department.

To establish guidelines for the placement
of uniform accessories and guidelines on
work shoes furnished by the Department.

This SOP is not all-inclusive and cannot
encompass all situations which may be
encountered.

II. RESPONSIBILITY

All members are responsible for
maintaining a neat and professional
appearance within the guidelines of this
policy.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

r rating Pr res Manual
GA 7.00 Uniforms

All officers are responsible to ensure that those whom they supervise
comply with Departmental uniform standards.

This policy covers those uniforms worn by members of the Poquoson
Fire/Rescue Department.

The Fire Chief shall have the authority to establish or change Fire
Department uniform standards and policies.

III. POLICY

All uniform clothing worn by Fire Department members shall meet
Poquoson Fire/Rescue specifications and shall be neat in appearance
and professionally groomed at all times while on duty, when
reporting to and from duty and while operating at incidents. No
department issued uniforms or parts thereof will be worn except in an
official capacity or while attending a designated function authorized
by the Fire Chief.

Fire Department members shall maintain, at least, the minimum
amount of uniform clothing necessary to meet the standards set forth
in this policy.

Members shall not remain in any state of undress or semi-undress in
any public area.

Those uniforms, which are listed within this policy, shall be the only
officially recognized uniforms of the Poquoson Fire/Rescue
Department.

IV. PROCEDURES

The Department uniform, or any part thereof, will not be
worn by other than Poquoson Fire/Rescue members or by off
duty members except in travel to or from duty or unless
approved by the Fire Chief.

Nothing will be worn on the uniform or the person that will be
distracting to the uniform or the person as a member of the Poquoson

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

ndar rating Pr res Manual
GA 7.00 Uniforms

Fire/Rescue Department. Unapproved caps or hats (except protective
headgear required for riding motorcycles to and from duty) will not be
allowed. Normally, hats will be removed when entering a building.

Long sleeved undershirts will not be worn under short sleeve uniform
shirts. All uniform shirt tails will be neatly tucked in trousers, all shirt
buttons buttoned except collar button.

No member of the Poquoson Fire/Rescue Department will consume or
purchase alcohol or other intoxicating substances while wearing the
department uniform or any identifying part thereof.

No uniforms or parts thereof will take the place of protective clothing.

All uniforms or any identifying part thereof issued to volunteer
members of the Poquoson Fire/Rescue Department will be worn in
accordance with this SOP. When called upon to appear with the
Poquoson Fire/Rescue Department, the standards established within
this policy will be followed to include personal appearance, grooming,
and behavior.

Fire personnel shall wear and maintain their uniforms in such a
manner so as to present a cleanly pressed and neat appearance.
Uniforms shall be clean and free of rips, tears, and holes and shall not
be missing any required parts such as buttons, patches, and accessories.
Only those uniform accessories, which are listed within this policy, are
approved to be worn with Fire Department uniforms. (See (H) Uniform
Accessories)

When reporting for normal duty, personnel shall wear a clean wrinkle-
free regulation uniform (Class C).

Employees shall wear their full uniforms at all times during on-duty
working hours.
e The shift’s Battalion Chief or Officer-in-Charge
may make necessary exceptions as the situation
dictates.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

ndar rating Pr res Manual
GA 7.00 Uniforms

e Atany given time, all shift members shall be in
the same uniform unless otherwise specified by the
shift’s Battalion Chief or Officer-in-Charge.

No civilian clothing will be worn over the top of any Fire Department
uniform at any time or Fire Department clothing over civilian
clothing
A. FULL DRESS UNIFORM

1. Dress pants

2. Dress uniform shirt

3. Dress uniform jacket

4. Dress uniform hat

5. Dress uniform tie

6. Dress black shoes

7. Black socks

8. Appropriate accessories.(See Item H)

B. CLASS A DRESS UNIFORM

The dress uniform (Class A) uniform is worn by Fire
Department Chief Officers in staff positions. The following
items comprise the full dress uniform:

1. Dress navy blue trousers.
2. Dress navy blue jacket.

3. Long or short sleeve white shirt.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

ndar rating Pr r nual
GA 7.00 Uniforms

4. Black tie with tie tack.

5. Black belt with buckle.

6. Black shoes.

7. Black, dark blue socks

8. Navy blue winter coat.

g. Appropriate accessories.(See Item H)

C. CLASS B DRESS UNIFORM

1. Short or long sleeve blue dress for Fire Fighters and
Volunteer personnel. Gray for Captains and
Lieutenants.

2. Navy blue trousers.

3. Winter navy coat.

4. Black belt with buckle.

5. Black shoes/boots made of leather or similar
material.

6. Black, dark blue socks (white bottoms or toes
acceptable).

D. WORK UNIFORM

The work (class C) uniform is worn by all personnel attached
to the Fire Department who hold the rank of Battalion Chief
through Fire Fighter. The work uniform is an optional uniform
for Administrative Chief Officers depending upon the type of
activities in which they may be engaged. The following items
comprise the work uniform:

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

GA 7.00

ndar rating Procedures Manual
Uniforms

. Short or long sleeve polo shirt, navy blue for Fire

Fighters and Volunteer personnel. Grey for shift
Fire Captains and Lieutenants, White for
Administrative personnel. Navy blue T-shirts are
acceptable for Firefighters and Volunteer personnel.
Grey T-shirts are acceptable for Lieutenants.

. Navy blue trousers. Chief officers will wear dress

navy blue trousers.

. Winter navy coat.
. Black belt with buckle.

. Black shoes/boots made of leather or similar

material.

. Black, dark blue socks (white bottoms or toes

acceptable).

. Sweat shirts

. Navy blue shorts (If forecasted high temperature is

65 degrees Fahrenheit or greater)

E. SHOES

Black work shoes approved by the Fire Chief will be worn
while on duty. Dress shoes approved by the Fire Chief will be
worn with the Class A and Class B uniform.

1. No canvas shoes or any other brand, style will be

worn on duty unless specified by the Fire Chief.

2. Shoes/boots will be kept clean, polished and

zipped/tied at all times while on duty.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

GA 7.00

F.

H.

n rating Pr res M 1]
Uniforms

3. Uniform pants are to be worn out of the boot and
rest on the foot portion of the boot. All upper
portions of the boot will be hidden by the pants. In
order to accomplish this, the boot must be laced
completely to the top. If this is a problem with the
employee’s type of boot, a decision must be made to
change boots or wear shoes.

4. Shoes with rips, tears, and/or holes will not be worn
on duty.

5. Black sneakers or mid height boots must be worn
with uniforms shorts. Sneakers shall be entirely
black.

SOCKS

Socks worn with either Class A or B uniform will be black,
white bottoms or toes acceptable.

Socks worn with uniform shorts will be black socks.

. T-SHIRTS

T-shirts, dark blue with department logo in color, may be
worn while on duty in lieu of uniform shirt, during training
or certain station duties, with officer’s approval.

T-shirts issued by the department may be worn with civilian
clothes while off duty. T-shirts purchased from the
department may be worn by family members.

T-shirts worn as the outer shirt of the work uniform must be
tucked inside the uniform pants.

UNIFORM ACCESSORIES

The basic uniform accessories issued to all personnel are
listed in (1).

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

ndar rating Pr res Manual

GA 7.00 Uniforms

Patches, badges, insignias or any other type of accessories

shall be worn only if approval has first been obtained from
the office of the Fire Chief.

1. Patches.

a) State or National EMS patches may be worn
on the right sleeve of the uniform (Class
A/Class B) shirt and winter coat one (1) inch
below the shoulder seam.

b) Only one (1) patch with rockers of appropriate
level of training may be worn per uniform.

2. Collar Insignia

a) Collar insignias issued will be worn one (1)
inch above the tip or point of the uniform
shirt collar and centered on the collar and run
parallel to the edge of the collar.

b) Collar insignias as issued will be worn on the
lapel of a Class “A” blouse as described.

c) Collar insignias on the blouse will be placed
with the wide of the (primary) trumpet(s)
opening to the corner of the collar.

d) Collar insignias will be worn on the lapel one

(1) inch from the outside seam of the winter
coat.

e) Collar insignias on the winter coat will be
worn as prescribed in this section.

3. Badges

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

GA 7.00

rating Pr res Manual
Uniforms

Badges as issued will be worn on the uniform shirt
or coat above the left breast pocket.

. Name plates

Name plates will be worn centered on the right
breast pocket with the top of the name plate even
with the seam of the flap of the pocket.

. Hats

Only official Fire Department hats may be worn by
on-duty personnel.

. Sleeve Braid — these braids will be worn on the

sleeve of the Class A jacket as follows:

. Fire Chief — 5 braids — Gold

. Deputy Fire Chief — 4 braids — Gold
. Battalion Chief — 2 braids — Gold

. Captain — 2 braids — Silver

. Lieutenant — 1 thick braid - Silver

onnop

I. BASIC UNIFORM CLOTHING ISSUE

1. New Hire clothing issue. The following will be issued to all new
hire employees as part of their standard equipment.

Work pants/shorts — 3 pair, employee choice

Polo Shirts — 2 long or short sleeve, employee choice
T-shirts - 3

Winter work coat with removable liner or Job shirt
Black belt with buckle

5.11 foul weather coat with nametag

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

n rating Pr res Manual
GA 7.00 Uniforms

2. Release from Probation: The following will be ordered
for each employee upon their successful release from
probation.

Long sleeve light blue class B shirt - 1
PFD Collar Insignia — 1 pair
Name plate - 1

Uniform badge - 1

3. The following items will be issued for newly promoted
personnel:

Master Firefighter
Master Firefighter Collar Pin — 1
Master Firefighter Badge — 1

Polo shirts — 3 (long/short sleeve, employee
choice)

Lieutenant

Long sleeve grey class B shirt - 1

Polo shirts, grey — 3 (long/short sleeve,
employee choice)

Uniform badge, silver — 2
Trumpets, single, silver — 2 pair

Captain

Long sleeve grey class B shirt — 1 (if not
already issued)

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

ndar rating Pr res Manual
GA 7.00 Uniforms

Polo shirts, grey — 3 (long/short sleeve,
employee choice)

Uniform badge, silver — 2

Trumpets, two parallel, silver — 2 pair
Battalion Chief

Long sleeve white class B shirt — 1

Polo shirts, white — 3 (long/short sleeve,
employee choice)

Dress uniform pants — 3 pair
Dress shoes — 1 pair
Uniform badge, gold — 2
Trumpets, two crossed, gold — 2 pair
Name badge, gold — 2
Deputy Chief
Uniform order as needed
Fire Chief
Uniform order as needed

J. CLOTHING REQUEST

Members wishing to obtain uniform items outside of
normal ordering windows shall submit a request for such
to their direct supervisor with the justification for such
items.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

GA 7.00

ndar rating Pr res Manual
Uniforms

Clothing request shall contain a list of the clothing items
desired, quantities of each and sizes.

Request will then be forwarded to the Fire Chief or his
designated representative.

All requests for new shoes, including those not issued by
the department, must first be approved by the Fire Chief.
Only shoes approved by the Fire Chief will be permitted
while on-duty.

Uniform orders will be entertained at the request of the
Fire Chief or his appointed representative.

Only approved items in this document will be accepted.

If budget constraints prohibit the purchase of uniforms, it
is still the employee’s responsibility to maintain adequate
numbers of uniforms.

Any employee who loses his/her uniform will be
responsible for replacement of the uniform, with the
amount deducted from the employee’s next regular
paycheck, in accordance with Section 31.1 of the City of
Poquoson Policy Manual.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
