# so_12.00_suas_operations

City of Poquoson Fire and Rescue

SUAS Operations

I. PURPOSE

This policy is intended to provide
personnel who are assigned
responsibilities associated with the
deployment and use of small Unmanned
Aerial Systems with instructions on when
and how this technology and the
information it provides may be used for
fire and life safety, and/or other public
safety purposes in accordance with law to
help facilitate increased situational
awareness and incident command
decisions at emergency scenes and/or
disaster incidents. The agency will
continuously explore better, safer, and
more efficient tools to help support their
missions which help ensure safer
communities through prevention,
preparedness, and effective emergency
responses. For the purpose of this policy,
the term department shall refer to
Poquoson Fire/Rescue

City of Poquoson
Fire and Rescue

830 Poquoson Ave.
Poquoson, VA 23662

757-868-3510
F757-868-3514

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

SOP#: S.O/f,00

Title:_sUAS Operations

Effective Date:___ 06/01/2017

This SOP is not all-inclusive and cannot
encompass all situations that may be
encountered.

II. APPLICATION

Lg ‘ity Manager’s Signature

All career personnel

Special Operations 

i M
SO 11.00 sUAS Operations

Ill. POLICY

The mission of the sUAS program is to provide aerial support and
assistance to Poquoson Fire/Rescue in situations where the operating
environment is hazardous or unreachable due to environmental
interference.

It shall be the policy of the departments that duly trained and
authorized agency personnel may deploy sUAS when such use is
appropriate in the performance of their official duties, and where
deployment and use, and the collection and use of any audio/video
recordings or other data originating from or generated by the sUAS,
comport with the policy provisions provided herein and applicable
law. Once the sUAS team is activated, deployment will be mission
specific, and will strictly adhere to current policies and procedures, as
with any emergency response.

IV. DEFINITIONS

Certificate of Authorization or Waiver (COA): an
authorization issued by the Air Traffic Organization to a public
operator for a specific Unmanned Aerial activity.

Crew Resource Management (CRM): The effective use of all
available resources for flight crew personnel to assure a safe and
efficient operation, reducing error, avoiding stress and increasing
efficiency.

Digital Multimedia Evidence (DME): Digital recording of
images, sounds, and associated data.

Model Aircraft: A remote controlled aircraft used by hobbyists that
is built, produced, manufactured, and operated for the purposes of
sport, recreation, and/or competition.

Unmanned Aircraft (UA) or Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV): An aircraft that is intended to navigate in the air without an
on-board pilot. Also alternatively called Remotely Piloted Aircraft
(RPA), Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV), or Drone.

Special Operations 

SO 11.00 sUAS Operations

Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS): A system that includes the
necessary equipment, network, and personnel to control an
unmanned aircraft.

Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (sUAS): UAS systems that
utilize UAVs weighing less than 55 pounds and are consistent with
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations governing model
aircraft.

UAS Flight Crewmember: A pilot, visual observer, payload
operator or other person assigned duties for a UAS for the purpose of
flight or training exercise.

Unmanned Aircraft Pilot: A person exercising control over a
UA/UAV/UAS during flight.

V. PROCEDURES

Administration:

All deployments of sUAS must be specifically authorized by
supervisory personnel. The department has adopted the use of SUAS
to provide an aerial visual perspective in responding to and operating
at emergency and/or disaster situations, exigent circumstances, and
for the following objectives:

Situational Awareness:

To assist decision makers (e.g., incident command staff; first
responders; city, county, and state officials) in understanding the
nature, scale, and scope of an incident—and for planning and
coordinating an effective response.

Search and Rescue:

To assist missing person investigations, AMBER Alerts, Silver Alerts,
and other search and rescue missions.

Special Operations 

SO 11.00 SUAS Operations

Tactical Deployment:
To support the tactical deployment of resources and equipment in

emergency situations (e.g., significant or potentially significant fire
and rescue incidents, incidents involving acts of violence, support for
largescale tactical/technical operations, and other temporary
perimeter security situations).

Visual Perspective:
To provide an aerial visual perspective in order to assist personnel in

providing direction for traffic incident management, special
circumstances, and temporary perimeter control (e.g., edges of a fire
line or disaster area).

Incident Command and EOC support:
To provide aerial reconnaissance/observation, in order to support

strategic and tactical decision making on emergency scenes, major
incidents and/or disasters.

Scene Documentation:
To document an accident scene, or other major incident scene (e.g.,
structure fire, wildland fire, disaster management, incident response).

Procedures for sUAS use:

The department must obtain applicable authorizations, permits, or
certificates required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)

prior to deploying or operating the sUAS, and these authorizations,
permits, and certificates shall be maintained and current.

The sUAS will be operated only by personnel (pilots and
crewmembers) who have been trained and certified in the operation
of the system.

The minimum crew requirements for sUAS operations are two (2),
one (1) pilot and one (1) observer.

Special Operations 

__CStarnddard Operating Procedures Manual
SO 11.00 SUAS Operations

A standard crew for sUAS operations shall consist of three (3)
persons, one (1) pilot, one (1) observer and (1) scribe/liaison. The
scribe’s responsibilities will be flight log and radio communication
and need not be a sUAS team member if SUAS team members are not
available.

When staffing permits, an Air Boss will be utilized. An Air Boss will
be the overall controller of air operations and serve as the liaison
between the air unit and incident command.

Crewmembers will consist of sUAS team members from Poquoson
Fire/Rescue but may be supplemented with team members from the
York County sUAS team as necessary except for the provision above.

A supervisor will notify the 911 Center of the need for the sUAS team.
A page will notify all sUAS team members of the location and nature
of the nature of the call. Team members will confirm their response
with the 911 Center, coordinate the gathering of the necessary SUAS
equipment, and notify Poquoson Station 1 (or current location where
positioned) to respond sUAS resources, to the incident location.

The sUAS-certified personnel shall inspect and test sUAS equipment
prior to each deployment to verify the proper functioning of all
equipment and the airworthiness of the device.

The sUAS equipment is the responsibility of individual team
members and will be used with reasonable care to ensure proper
functioning. Equipment malfunctions shall be brought to the
attention of a team supervisor as soon as possible so that an
appropriate repair can be made or a replacement unit can be
procured.

The sUAS equipment and all data, images, video, and metadata
captured, recorded, or otherwise produced by the equipment is the
sole property of the City. Any incident scene related data, images,
video, and metadata captured, recorded, or otherwise produced by
the equipment is the sole property of Poquoson Fire/Rescue.

Special Operations 

rating Pr res Man
SO 11.00 sUAS Operations

Safety of the sUAS operations (including persons and property) is the
responsibility of the entire team and therefore Crew Resource
Management shall be utilized for all sUAS operations. sUAS team
members should bring to the attention of other members and scene
supervisors any condition that they feel is a safety concern.

All sUAS team members will be familiar with the COA and
Attachments, which relate to operation of the sUAS and comply with
same.

Pre-flight Procedures:
A pre-flight check of the sUAS (including tuning if necessary will be
completed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation.

Communications:
All radio communications required by the FAA will be complied with.

Communications with sUAS team members during operations will be
limited to operationally necessary communications in order to
minimize disruptions to sUAS team members.

The sUAS shall be operated in accordance within manufacturer
specifications and applicable FAA limitations and restrictions.

Operations:
Care shall be taken in the operation of the UAV to avoid/limit

overflying persons and property to ensure privacy and avoid injury or
damage whenever possible.

For all operations, the observer shall utilize a distance from the sUAS
that will adequately permit them to maintain a visual observation on
the sUAS and maintain personnel safety.

All sUAS team members will comply with all limitations, restrictions
and requirements as enumerated in the COA.

Special Operations 

SO 11.00 sUAS Operations

Post Flight:
A post-flight check of the sUAS will be completed on accordance with

the manufacturer’s recommendation

All flights will be documented on a form or database designed for that
purpose, and all flight time shall be accurately recorded. In addition,
each deployment of the sUAS shall include information regarding the
reason for the flight; the time, date, and location of the flight; the
name of the supervisor approving the deployment and the staff
assigned; and a summary of the activities covered, actions taken, and
outcomes from the deployment.

RESTRICTIONS on USING the sUAS:

The sUAS shall be deployed and used only to support official fire and
life safety and/or other official public safety missions, training,
demonstrations or other official business.

The sUAS shall not be operated in an unsafe manner or in violation of
FAA rules.

DME RETENTION and MANAGEMENT:
All DME shall be handled in accordance with existing policy on data
and record retention, where applicable.

The sUAS-certified operators will record information for each flight
that shall include the date, time, location, and incident numbers or
other mission identifiers—and identify the sUAS personnel involved
in mission.

Personnel shall not edit, alter, erase, duplicate, copy, share, or
otherwise distribute in any manner sUAS DME without authorization
and approval of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee.

All access to SUAS DME must be specifically authorized by the Fire
Chief or his or her designee, and all access shall be audited to ensure
that only authorized users are accessing the data for legitimate and
authorized purposes.

Special Operations 

Tr
SO 11.00 SUAS Operations

Files should be securely stored in accordance with approved policies
and state records retention laws and retained no longer than
necessary for purposes of training, emergency scene documentation,
damage assessment reporting, or other approved need.

SUAS SUPERVISION and REPORTING:

sUAS personnel shall manage all deployments and uses of sUAS to
ensure that personnel equipped with sUAS devices utilize them in
accordance with policy and procedures defined herein.

An authorized sUAS administrator will audit flight documentation at
regular intervals. The results of the audit will be documented. Any
changes to the flight time counter will be documented.

TRAINING:

Personnel who are assigned sUAS must complete an approved
training program as designated by the department to ensure proper
use and operations, as well as to meet the minimum requirements of
the COAs that are in place for the City. Within six months of being
accepted to the team, personnel must be certified as an FAA Part 107
Remote Pilot. Additional training may be required at periodic
intervals to ensure the continued effective use, operation, proper
calibration, and performance of the equipment and to incorporate
changes, updates, or other revisions in policy and equipment.

All personnel with sUAS responsibilities, including command officers,
shall also be trained in the local and federal laws and regulations, as
well as policies and procedures governing the deployment and use of
sUAS.

MAINTENANCE:

All repairs shall be made after consulting (as appropriate) with
qualified manufacturer repair technicians. Should a repair be needed
that is beyond the capabilities of sUAS team members, the aircraft
shall be sent to a qualified repair center for repairs.

BATTERIES:

sUAS batteries will be maintained in a sufficient charged state to
ensure immediate operability upon deployment. Batteries will be
labeled and replaced as necessary.

Special Operations 

SO 11.00 SUAS Operations

SERVICING:

Aircraft Technicians will ensure that a spare tool kit and parts are
available for deployment to allow sUAS operators to remedy minor
issues in the field (e.g. tightening loose screws, replacing antennas,
changing pod straps, etc.). Employees, technicians and authorized
subcontractors of the manufacturer, that they permit to service the
sUAS, shall also be allowed to maintain service and repair the sUASs
as necessary while acting as agents for the manufacturer.

DAMAGE:

Any damage to the sUAS or its support equipment shall be
immediately reported to a SUAS supervisor. Any damage to the sUAS
or its equipment that is determined to render the system un-
airworthy shall be labeled so as to be visually observable. AsUAS
supervisor will be contacted and advised.

TRAINING/PROFICIENCY:

Initial Training:

Initial sUAS training will be accomplished by attending an authorized
training course that meets the COA requirement of: 16 hours of
classroom instruction on aeronautical knowledge as stated in 14 CFR
61.105 as they pertain to sUAS operations in the NAS.

Recurrent Training:
Operations permitting, sUAS training will be conducted on a regular

basis by all certified personnel. The training will consist at a
minimum of 1 takeoff and landing event in order to meet the
proficiency and currency requirements, weather permitting. sUAS
certified personnel not able to attend training will attempt to make up
the session at the earliest possible opportunity. The intent is to have
AU pilots maintain currency and be prepared for missions.

Special Operations 

SO 11.00 sUAS Operations

Proficiency:
All sUAS pilots will maintain currency in the sUAS in order to be

readily available for assignment as a SUAS team member. Currency
for sUAS operations will consist of three (3) take-off and landing
events within the last 90 days prior to act as PIC. If a sUAS pilot is not
current, they must notify their immediate supervisor and will not be
eligible to operate the sUAS as PIC (except for training purposes)
until they regain currency.

Training Site(s):

sUAS training will only take place at a site designated and approved
by the FAA for such purpose.

Training Notifications:
In compliance with FAA COAs which have been issued to the City of

Poquoson, notifications will be made to the appropriate FAA facilities
prior to sUAS operations as required. Additionally, notifications
deemed appropriate for airspace safety purposes will also be made
(e.g. Yorktown Naval Weapons Station, USCG TRACEN, Camp Perry,
Cheatham Annex, Fort Eustis, Langley Air Force Base, airports in the
area and other users of the airspace).

STORAGE/TRANSPORTATION:

Storage:

The sUAS and support equipment will be securely stored at a
Poquoson Fire/Rescue facility in the designated container for timely
portability and deployment.

Transportation:
Prior to transporting the sUAS for deployment, the Team Member

responsible for transport will ensure that all necessary gear is loaded
by comparing the gear with the sUAS Equipment Checklist and insure
that all aircraft and equipment is securely stored for transportation.

Special Operations
